hello math fans i'm dr. tom crawford
from tom rocks maths and the University
of Oxford and I'm here to introduce this
fantastic video from Trevor on the same
topic as the essay he submitted to the
Teddy rocks math essay competition the
competition is open to anyone all you
have to do to enter is to write about
your favourite mathematical topic for a
non specialist audience it will be
running again in early 2021 so keep a
lookout for any announcements and in the
meantime enjoy Trevor's brilliant video
suppose there are two piles of arbitrary
numbers of stones and you are playing
against an opponent you and your
opponent can count the numbers of stones
in each pile beforehand to determine the
winning strategy
you and your opponent take turns to
remove some stones from the piles but
you can only remove any number of stones
from one pile or remove the same number
of stones from both piles you cannot
skip your turn the game continues until
no more stones left in both piles there
are two ways of determining who wins the
game method a the person removing the
last stone wins whether it be the person
removing the last stone loses these are
the two opposite games we will be
talking about what would be the winning
strategy in either method or the winning
strategies for method a different from
method B thus the strategy change
depending on whether you are the first
one to play the game or should you
kindly invite your opponent to play the
game first if so does that depend on the
numbers of stones in either pile we are
going to answer all these questions but
I encourage you to pause the video and
think of the answers first let's start
small and suppose that one pile has one
stone and the other has two if the game
is run according to method a
then whoever goes first loses why
whoever goes first have four possible
choices of moves and whoever goes next
could take the remaining stones because
these are all allowed moves so basically
you want the remaining stones to be left
to you which means you want to leave all
these to your opponent because whatever
your opponent does you can take the
remaining stones and win so your goal is
to remove the stones so that it reaches
this configuration then no matter what
your opponent does you will win for
simplicity we call this the one two
configuration and we call this a winning
pair because if you can make it to this
configuration then you are guaranteed to
win but are there any other winning
Paras also this is only for method a and
we should expect to have different
winning pairs for the other method we
will focus on method a for now the
winning pairs will form a table and to
allow better navigation for the table we
will index the winning pairs starting
from zero for reasons explained later
for each winning pair we denote a n to
be the smaller number in the pair and B
n to be the large number and might seem
redundant but we will include zero zero
as a winning pair again for reasons
explained later this comes directly from
the method of determining who wins the
game if you can reach to zero zero
configuration in your turn you just won
the game for the first column we will
put one two because we have just shown
that this is a winning pair from the
rules of the game we can infer some
rules that this winning table needs to
follow firstly there should be no
repeats indifferent winning pairs this
means something like this or this or
this cannot happen let's say these two
are really winning pairs then your
opponent can reach from one winning pair
to another making him or her when
instead so at least one of them can not
be a winning pair the second rule is the
difference between a n and B n should
not repeat this means something like
these two pairs cannot happen why again
your opponent can easily reach from one
winning pair to another making him or
her win instead a subtle note is that
rule number one says different winning
pairs so if the repeat is in the same
winning pair like the 0th one it is fine
but because of rule number two this can
only occur in one winning pair this
means all natural numbers appear at most
ones on this table except for zero if
you count zero as a natural number the
best-case scenario is that every natural
appears exactly once on the table so
that more winning pairs are available
and that all the differences appear
exactly once we can't guarantee this
happening yet but this is the hope so
according to these rules we construct a
winning table the number three hasn't
appeared yet and it has to be the
smallest of what comes after so we put
it as a two a difference of two hasn't
appeared yet so we put a 5 here so that
the difference of two appears then the
number four hasn't appeared on the table
yet so we put it as a three and again a
difference of three hasn't appeared yet
so we put a seven there so that a
difference of three appears
applying this kind of reasoning over and
over we can construct the entire winning
table but are these really winning Paris
can we really be guaranteed to win if
say we remove the stones to this 813
configuration I won't show the entire
proof here but the approach is that no
matter what the opponents do you can
always reach one of the previous winning
including the zeroth one to directly win
so what can your opponents do after you
attain this 813 configuration well he or
she can remove stones only from the pile
with eight stones only from the pile
with 13 stones or removed the same
number of stones from both piles and the
gist of the proof is to show what you
can do in each of the three cases this
proof is not really the focus of the
video but feel free to treat this as a
little exercise and leave a comment for
the proof now what about method B where
the person removing the last stone loses
an obvious winning pair would be zero
one because you will force the opponent
to remove the last stone the next
winning pair would be to - why is two to
a winning pair let's suppose after your
turn you'll leave two to configuration
to your opponent then your opponent has
these six possible moves including the
option to remove all stones in all moves
you can always either leave one stone
behind for your opponents to lose or
directly win if your opponent has
removed all stones already so back to
the winning table for Method B again we
can use the rules below to deduce the
rest of the winning table and here we go
these all look pretty suspicious why
compared to to winning tables from the
different methods apart from the first
two columns all the other winning pairs
are the same for both games the
fascinating thing is that they are
supposed to be two opposite games yet
they have largely the same winning pairs
the fascination does not end there what
about the golden ratio in a title let's
revisit the winning table again the
first row a n is the integer part of n
times fee the golden ratio and the
second row BN is the integer part of n
times V squared for example according to
this formula a four is the integer part
of four times the golden ratio which is
released six and B five is the integer
part of five times golden ratio squared
which is relieved thirteen but how and
why is golden ratio involved first off
we need to reverse it what the golden
ratio is it is the positive root of this
quadratic equation so everything that
you see here eventually will relate to
this quadratic equation specifically we
want to see why these formulas for a N
and B n fulfill these rules we first
explain why all the differences appear
exactly once we considered a difference
and using the formulas for a n and B n
we get this expression based on the
defining property of the golden ratio we
can replace V squared by 1 plus V which
can be further manipulated to be just n
so if we have different ends the
differences in the same winning pair
would be different so we have explained
why all the differences would appear
exactly once what about the other row
that every natural number except for
zero appears exactly once we will prove
they appear at most ones first then
proof they appear at least once
combining these two will give the
exactly once rule above we go for the at
most once part first we first need to
rewrite this quadratic so let's suppose
there is a natural number P appearing
twice on the winning table which means
it is a M for some m and BN for some n
by the definition of the integer part we
have M times V and n times V squared to
be between P and P plus 1 we use the
strict inequality sign here because fee
and fee squared are irrational so a
multiple of it would not be an integer
dividing the first inequality by fee and
the second inequality by fee squared
then by adding these up we get this kind
of monstrous inequality but because of
the rewritten quadratic equation these
brackets Oh sum up to one but then M
plus n is an integer so it cannot be
between two consecutive integers P and P
plus 1 which is a contradiction this
means the original assumption that P can
appear twice in the winning table is not
true what about the at least one spot
suppose a number P cannot be generated
by a n or B n then on this number line
P sits between two consecutive am s so
we have these two inequalities about P
by changing up the number line a little
bit we can similarly write down two
inequalities then what we will do is
very similar to what we did before which
is to divide the inequalities by fee and
fee squared having this pair of
inequalities we have this blue
inequality if we instead add another
pair of inequalities we will have this
inequality
instead again because of the rewritten
quadratic at the top these two brackets
up
one we can further subtract one from
both sides of the inequality on the
right to get this by simply combining
these two inequalities we have P to be
trapped between two consecutive integers
which is again impossible
so the original assumption that P cannot
be generated by a N or BN is wrong which
means all integers must appear in the
winning table so we have explained why
the golden ratio seemingly unrelated to
the discrete nature of the game is
actually related to the game this was
very fascinating to me when I first knew
this so leave a comment if you are also
surprised by the connection with the
golden ratio if you enjoyed this video
give it a thumbs up and share it don't
forget to subscribe of notifications on
for more of these math videos see you
next time
you